baddest yen if there is one article if
there's just one person who's a critic
who points to a flaw in the basis of
evidence used by all of the other
articles then that one article
invalidates all 50 articles if there's
one article that points to a
methodological flaw that is found in the
other 50 articles you can't treat them
equally you can't take an average of the
findings you have to actually understand
in a narrative way how did we start with
this thesis how do we come to this
conclusion how do we know what we know
how do we put the facts together peer
review is not what you think it is peer
review means that I've managed to find
maybe two or three people who will
glanced over the essay and say yes this
is worth publishing peer review is not
editorial it doesn't mean someone has
gone through as an editor and in fact
checked my claims a peer review is
fundamentally a system of censorship
it's not a system of Socratic dialogue
or debate it's a peer review is not even
as thorough as if I took my ideas and
presented them verbally to a group of
people who are inclined to to criticize
and cross-examine what was going on in
the paper so I mean it's just a peer
review it's not that it's evil but it is
really not what people think it is the
function SSRIs were supposed to have and
that unnatural began's still to this say
day is unscientifically pseudo
scientifically claiming the original
thesis was that depression linked to low
levels of serotonin right and that
therefore SSRI drugs would augment
Puddle increase serotonin levels in the
brain that has been debunked that is
pseudoscience and she is seriously
recommending that more people do the
irresponsible ignorant self-indulgent
thing that she's doing and not read the
kind of sources of so do not rejoin a
montcrief
not read Peter Breggin country experts
in the field to devoted their lives of
this and publish many books on it not
read the peer-reviewed or even again
even if so again this comes back to my
thing about Buddhism
even if the one article I read you guys
at the start of my last video I read
that in three minutes
even if that was the only source of its
kind which it's not if there was just
one article that invalidated the
evidence base and the methodology of the
other 50 articles then that one article
is enough that tells you what you need
to know if you are a skeptic let's all
look in the mirror and think about what
what skeptic means peer review doesn't
mean that people are lying
Buddhists lie in peer-reviewed articles
about putting some Catholics lie in
peer-reviewed articles about a polka
thoughtless ism I dealt with this before
the the meditation articles then get
published meditation drills yes people
lie in scientific journals sometimes
it's because they sincerely believe the
lie in the same way that a Buddhist you
know may believe they believe yeah yeah
to me it's just ridiculous that people
who are vegan who are pardon me aware
that there have been so many studies
published on positive effects of meat
and dairy and they are able to think
skeptically about it and say that you
shouldn't pay attention to these these
studies you should pay attention to
these ones that advocate for a
plant-based diet or at least provide
evidence that a plant-based diet is
healthier than a typical omnivorous diet
so it's like why if you don't trust your
doctor when they tell you that you
shouldn't eat meat why would you trust
them when they tell you that you should
get on an antidepressant or why would
you trust just the general opinion that
from whatever your experiences were like
reading online or talking to people
people maybe your family members who
have antidepressants like why would you
take that at face value when you know
that you're that same family member it's
me
enduring Starion you know see knowing
that like you live with these these own
yeah you live with scientifically
unpopular opinions I mean poor that way
your opinion is against what you could
call the consensus in science
[Music]
about us yen when I first came up with
the topic for this video I was highly
motivated and full of life and energy to
record the video and man jetlag caught
up with me and would be exhausted and
drained maybe that's for the best
because it's a somewhat somber topic for
the video there are two different
examples linked by this one related
overarching issue I want to talk about
in this video for me the fundamental
issue I want to talk about I think our
attitudes towards science and knowledge
and the easiest proxy to deal with here
is this ghost of peer-reviewed
literature peer-reviewed scientific
articles so you know I mean look I got
so many disclaimers to throw in here I'm
going to save this all the time I can't
pitch my videos to the stupidest 20% of
my audience I got a lot of really stupid
emails and some really stupid Twitter
messages from people just rejecting the
basic premise the basic scientific facts
that have been posted on screen in a
series of videos dealing with
antidepressants and there is no point in
my spending my time backing up and
demonstrating such simple scientific
facts that have been proven in some
cases since 1982 in some cases since the
1990s where there are books published
and there are indeed lectures from
experts here on YouTube you can look up
I just don't see that as a productive or
worthwhile use of my time now so I'm
very very reluctant to address something
that I really think only pertains to the
stupidest 20% or stupid stupidness 40%
even of people who've watched and
responded to my earlier video but
amongst that stupid or 40% I saw this
tremendous self-confidence in taking the
average of wrong answers in saying oh
well I can look at you know 30 or 50
peer-reviewed article
or even whatever 30 and 50 textbooks and
I can insist that there were all these
peer-reviewed articles there for kind of
all of them must be half right and in
this case the inference is there for
SSRI drugs which I'm mostly going to
refer to here as antidepressants that's
only one chemical class of
antidepressant drugs that therefore the
science behind SSRI drugs is good
reliable so I'm really gonna deal with
two very different examples here in my
own life and experience having to do
with peer review I guess you can say
epistemology or philosophy of science or
knowledge or just how we live and know
things in the modern world but one of
them is from my experience in Buddhist
studies you know you'll see where I
include this in just a moment now the
point I'm trying to make in talking
about this example from research into
Buddhism is it does not matter if I have
10 or even 50 peer-reviewed articles
that a claimed effect notice I'm saying
claim here not prove you know you can
take an average you can take a census
and you can talk about consensus if
there is one article if there's just one
person who's a critic who points to a
flaw in the basis of evidence used by
all of the other articles then that one
article invalidates all 50 articles I'm
gonna go back to that explains a little
more if there's one article that points
to a methodological flaw that is found
in the other 50 articles you can't treat
them equally you can't take an average
of the findings you have to actually
understand in a narrative way I mean I'm
using the word narrative you don't have
said you have to kind of work up the
story of what happened and how and why
how did we start with this thesis how do
we come to this conclusion how do we
know what we know how did we put the
facts together say okay so there was an
error made here in methodology there was
error made here in terms of the actual
facts and then you have to analyze the
data from the different sources give
that finding so one of the controversies
I was involved with the Buddhism there
are a couple of really crucial
fundamental concepts in Buddhist
philosophy and in the Buddhist religion
that I challenged and whether or not I
was the only person to challenge them I
mean you have to define only person to
challenge it in English in the 21st
century or something I did look around
for other examples of other Buddhist
scholars who had kind of sort of made
the same point in most cases you could
find trace of other people who
recognized the problem sort of hidden
away here and there there are many books
still today again you can you can take a
you can take a census you can talk about
consensus of views among scholars and
even put as monks one of the most
popular foundations of Buddhist
philosophy taught in university
classrooms taught and puttest temples
and found in textbooks and in academic
writing is the so called philosophy of
interdependence so people normally say
the the twelve links of interdependence
now this is my point of a peer review
I'm sorry I have to talk about this
another their video reason what does it
mean let's just say there are 50
articles in reality there are more than
a hundred articles peer-reviewed
articles about this aspect of Buddhist
velocity but let's use the number fifty
if I have a corpus of fifty
peer-reviewed articles published by
scholars on Buddhism published by
Buddhist monks etc and all of them
affirm one after the other that yes
there's this text in the ancient
Buddhist scriptures and this is what it
means philosophically and this is what
it says and then I come along and say oh
no no the text actually doesn't say that
the fact that there are 50 articles the
significance of peer review really just
is that one Buddhist monk one true
believing adherent has presented this to
an editorial council of other Buddhist
monks of other people who passionately
believe in this religion and support its
future and the people who call
themselves secular scholars within
Buddhism it's the same with Christian
Christian Bible College you know who
goes to Oral Roberts University and gets
a PhD in
Christian studies or if you want to you
want to put it yes there are also
so-called secular but of studies
journals but the sense in which they're
secular is only the same senses in which
if you have a group of men who have PhDs
in Islam or Christianity you're normally
going to be dealing with an incredibly
high level of religious bias and
research bias just even in the selection
process for who will choose to get that
PhD who will become the involve the
editorial part of that journal and I
dunno different journals will have
different biases you'd know this right
if you just go to an academic library
and look at the journals for Catholic
studies for one thing some of the
journals are going to be interested in
the history of Catholicism in Spain some
in the history of Catholicism in France
there's gonna be a difference there what
type of person is involved in those
areas of study Buddhism people who are
involved in Japanese Buddhism different
from another another school Buddhism
this is a this is a fundamental
assumption about Buddhist philosophy
that many people considered to have been
proven and I was able to debunk it I
think debunk is the word by pointing to
the basis in evidence which is to say I
could actually read the ancient language
Pali and I could point to word by word
what the original text actually says and
then also I went and did the historical
research and I put together the
narrative I'm gonna use this word
narrative a few times
sorry I put together the narrative of
how the other thesis ever was
constructed how did we get the idea that
this text in this ancient Buddhist
scripture had this meaning about
interdependence this philosophical
concept that all things are connected
and arising and ceasing to exist and in
the mind it's this claim about
psychology of things being
interdependent and so on now this is not
a minor I'm sorry spoilers Oh put a link
to something I published on this below
but in getting how public is it and this
could not try to get this through
editorial boards and for journals and
foot of studies where again the people
are Buddhist monks or their so-called
secular scholars who are if anything
even more
he committed me even harder to shake
from their Orthodox news than Buddhist
monks it's very very difficult to get
this kind of thing out it was not a
minor or trivial mistranslation this
passage of ancient scripture was not
about human psychology at all it was not
about a philosophy of interdependence in
the sense it was very directly a
description of the formation of the
embryo of how pregnancy occurs pregnancy
and ultimately childbirth and if that
seems a little strange to you why would
a Buddhist philosophical text talk about
this in one word it's because of
reincarnation an aspect of reincarnation
if you take the re of the front of the
word one aspect is incarnation and an
important thing in Buddhism so youyou
heard me talking just yesterday to
Muhammad about this Buddhism teaches
that there is no soul and in India when
Buddhism was a new religion most of the
ideas that people had about pregnancy
reincarnation and incarnation had to do
with how the soul comes to be inside a
body how the soul creates a body or
company is reincarnated body and they
had to argue but as philosophers when
Buddhism was new they had to explain
basically where do babies come from and
where does the mind come from given they
had a model of human psychology and life
carnation carnation and reincarnation
that did not have a soul so it's an
interesting text in its own right what
I'm do bunking here is a
misinterpretation of the text that in
modern times had arisen and was bolted
on to a religious text which is
thematically philosophically about
something totally different and among
the the smoking gun evidence for this
and I've never once had an academic some
with a PhD or a Buddhist monk dispute me
on this but what okay I'll give a
specific example there was a professor
of Sanskrit so not of Palli but Sanskrit
which includes put us into some extent
Hinduism at a small University United
States and when he talked to me about it
by email I'll give two examples so
professor activist but he was shocked at
the hypothesis he was shocked that I had
bunk'd an assumption about Buddhist
religion scripture and philosophy that
was so fundamental and so widespread and
that there are definitely more than 50
peer-reviewed sources treating us
factual advancing as as as a proven fact
and his first response to my email was
to say well you know in later Sanskrit
sources this is not pally but Sanskrit
later Buddhist and Hindu sources you
know sometimes there are certain words
in Sanskrit that are used in an abstract
philosophical sex that people can
misinterpret as being sexual so is that
the problem here and I wrote back to him
and said the key word here is not to
could just mean are you actually going
to look at the original text and it's
very hard to get scholars of this kind
to look at the original text not at the
English the first language treatment
because very often their competence is
is much less than one of pretend it is
said the key word here is not to could
just Ming are you actually going to
claim to me that that this is an
abstract philosophical contents concept
an abstract or self concept and not a
literal description of what this ancient
Buddhist attacks about so MA to Matthew
is cognate with words we have in English
and European language like mother works
for mother in Latin and Greek all
resemble some and coches Ming is
actually cognate with some words we
still have even in English like Koo Chi
as as slang and another European and
Indian languages it Matt - cooch is Ming
the ending is the locative ending which
grammatically means the location of
something that one word alone means in
the side the mother's womb so no
interpretation can actually no
psychological or philosophical
reinterpretation this text that happened
could actually get past this fact um now
also sorry there's this narrative
element where I went back and looked at
okay how did the misinterpretation text
ever arise was the original source the
original European source that
reinterpreted was incredible and the
answer is no it's the actual book that
did it for
is basically a total crackpot book it
wouldn't be regarded as a respectable
day it was published as a book but it's
not not a peer-reviewed book or what
have you it's not really a scholarly
book just everything about this book and
who the author is and someone is not
respectable and then you I was able to
look at the history of how a thesis that
on its own is not credible isn't
demonstrated from the source text
doesn't have evidence came to be
repackaged and recycled in respected
peer-reviewed literature and came to be
regarded as as a foundational concept of
how Buddhism is understood today okay
all right why am i right and why is it
that 50 peer-reviewed articles are wrong
well point one I already made a video
but this recently peer review is not
what you think it is peer review means
that I've managed to find maybe two or
three people who will glance over the
essay and say yes this is worth
publishing peer review is not editorial
it doesn't mean someone has gone through
as an editor and in fact checked my
claims a peer review is fundamentally a
system of censorship it's not a system
of Socratic dialogue or debate it's a
peer review is not even as thorough as
if I took my ideas and presented them
verbally to a group of people who are
inclined to to criticize and
cross-examine what was going on in the
paper so I mean it's just a peer review
it's not that it's evil but it is really
not what people think it is peer review
simply put peer review does not prove
anything except that there is an
editorial board that that fundamentally
sympathizes with my my biases my right
so it was I was gonna mention one other
this is the human face of this one other
example of how a professor responded to
my discovery or you could say my
critique of what was assumed about about
Buddhist philosophy in this way so this
was again a professor at a smaller
University United States but this guy
was specifically professor of Buddhism
and he actually had already claimed that
he read my article in this we had a
conversation I'm sure he was just being
polite
but he said the article was brilliant
the article I wrote about this but the
12 lengths of interdependence which okay
well
seemed like you'd read it oh and then
he sent me a copy of one of his new
essays so something he'd written at that
time I've open his flossing and I read
it and I said back to him I said well
I'm surprised you're still making the
same error precisely the error I
disproved that the concept of a debunked
as false as not based in the public tax
this is a misinterpretation of the
ancient Buddhist scripture you're using
here as a central philosophical concept
in your new acid this idea of
psychological and depend interdependence
and the actual text is about where do
babies come from and he was shocked and
furious and really he was really really
angry now again this is someone who is a
secular scholar this is someone who's an
academic in a research institution in a
university teaching teenagers who pay
money to study there in theory this is
not a Buddhist monk this is not a
religious leader but there's a level of
commitment ideological commitment that
he was already out when he decided to
start his ph.d and that ideological
commitment is gonna change and transform
when he takes on a sense of
responsibility of being a professor
being a public figure who talks about
Buddhism psychologically someone who's
in academic can be even more committed
to Buddhism or to a school of thought in
psychiatry or some other secular Fuzzy's
they can be more committed than a
religious fanatic to be honest and you
can very easily have an editorial board
for a publication which may only be 5
people or maybe three people doing peer
review who are again highly highly
committed to some to some set of
assumptions a with the conversation
didn't end there I I think at that point
I hope I didn't said oh well you know
but I just said again you told me you
had already read that article and I
quote I said you know I quoted back we
said you said it was Brewin I said look
I I assume you didn't read it when you
have time you know read it and take a
look and let me know what you think and
he did I think it was about a month
later I got it I got a very humble email
from him and he said you know you're
doing something really important here
and I think that in future somebody
needs to go back and re-examine all
these texts and our assumptions of both
I mean it's just like very general he
still couldn't kind of concede the
specific point that this this very
fundamental assumption about about
Buddhist philosophy was it was false
okay now look you may think that the
sciences the hard sciences are very
fundamentally different put it this way
the structure and construction of truth
in the sciences you may think it's very
different from the way we assemble and
present the truth in Buddhist philosophy
or philosophy generally they have some
things in common there were some real
red flags with the narrative of how the
case was made for SSRI drugs that are
even in the name SSRI so we were just
talking about this melissa you were you
were going to take a shower you actually
stopped no wait I don't want to hear
that see we don't mention this so the
actually so serotonin reuptake
inhibitors yes no no you're right no so
the first s is for selective but the
core idea here is that this inhibits the
reuptake of serotonin right so the
fundamental thesis here about the human
mind and about the nature of depression
as a disease and about the course of
treatment is already built into the the
word and it's built into the kind of
verbiage that that unnatural vegan uses
in describing the conditioners treatment
and that the fundamental assumption here
is that depression is caused by having
too low a level of serotonin before when
when you're ill that the illness is
prompted by or consists of low levels of
serotonin in the brain now so even
distribution
we're always playing this video and the
guy said out loud in the video okay well
how do we measure this is there actually
evidence that's hot so now what do we
have to do we have to see do people with
depression have low serotonin before
they go on the drugs they begin doing
this even before prozac comes to market
and they give they don't give people an
SSR before they do this initially what
do they do what is the science to try to
check with people to see if they have
low serotonin before their Medicaid well
they know this so you can release the
serotonin then normally it's broken down
into metabolites and so they say we can
measure the level of metabolites and
their cerebrospinal fluid and if people
have low serotonin then they should have
low amounts of metabolites in that
cerebral spinal fluid you see the
indirect measurement so they run such a
study in the 1980s and what they find is
those metabolite levels are perfectly
normal that now they do fall along a
bell curve there's some of the low end
and there's some of the high end but
then you do the same thing with quote
normal people and you see the same bell
curve and then they also look like well
maybe the people who respond to
antidepressants are those at the low
into the bell curve and their serotonin
is being fixed by the drug and what they
found then when they put these people on
medication there was no correlation
between response to the drug and your
metabolite levels so in 1984 the NIH
says it doesn't look like a problem in
the serotonergic system is associated
with depression this in 1984 is the
beginning of the collapse of the the low
serotonin theory of depression three
years before prozac is brought to market
you
nobody's tested on their serotonin
levels before they're prescribed right
any antidepressant any what and why I
mean if you do if you are given drugs
for diabetes you are given an essay of
tests like well including your blood
sugar I mean most obviously we're going
to show that you should be well what I
mean so this is just linguistically what
you're talking about here is a
deficiency so if you have a serotonin
deficiency
why aren't you tested for that and told
okay so you a normal person has this
much okay another example sorry diabetes
is a good example but another one would
be say testosterone deficiency right so
many men today go in and take a test for
what are their testosterone levels and
they can compare that to other men's
testosterone levels or an average or
whatever they can also defer to their
own testosterone levels right you can
come in to the doctor over a five-year
period and get tested for your
testosterone levels again and again now
if you're a diabetic you're probably
testing your blood sugar levels multiple
times per day depends on how severe your
condition that's actually but you're
being tested for your your blood sugar
levels many many times over time so the
to Venus is the most obvious reflect but
which again like whether it's Buddhist
philosophy or philosophy of science or
medicine um so how many times have you
been tested for your your serotonin
levels did you test that your levels
were too low before and that now they've
normalized and then another big example
so another red flag that you don't need
to be a medical or it again when you
quit this drug you go through withdrawal
symptoms yeah so much all symptoms more
severe than your original depression yes
yes yes yeah it's it's very scary but
again so are there medical tests that
show that that these withdrawal symptoms
are related to your your serotonin
levels crashing right down that is the
theory of depression as disease that is
the theory of SSRI even built into the
the term and the effectiveness of the
drug so will
put up a clip for this I don't name
whether we've already put it up or we'll
put it up right now
um but since approximately 1982 1982
it has been scientifically known and
scientifically proven that this is not
true that the serotonin centered theory
is false as a medical fact that when you
measure people's serotonin levels this
this doesn't correspond to depression
anyway now after prozac is brought to
market they keep on researching this and
they keep on trying to find is there
something wrong with the serotonergic
system okay maybe the problem is okay
it's not that the presynaptic neurons
release too little serotonin maybe the
problem is those postsynaptic receptor
neurons have too few receptors for the
drug
maybe that's the an normality but they
don't find it now here is something from
the American Psychiatric Association's
own textbook in 1999 that sums up this
long search for a chemical imbalance and
depression and so what do they say to
themselves it says it was first proposed
the model Amin hypothesis is the low
serotonin and low norepinephrine
hypothesis because these are both known
as mono amines first proposed in 1965
this is why the drugs work however
watches inferring neurotransmitter
pathophysiology from an observed action
of a class of medications on
neurotransmitter activity is similar to
concluding that because aspirin causes
gastrointestinal bleeding headaches are
caused by too much blood loss and the
therapeutic action of aspirin in
headaches involves blood loss theirs to
make their poking fun of the hypothesis
saying it was sort of silly from the
beginning to just I pathi size that the
problem is the opposite of what the drug
does now this is as they're telling you
you have low serotonin this is in their
own textbook it says additional
experience has not confirmed the mono
amine depletion hypothesis were not
finding it to be so who Steve installed
he is a molecular psych biology
psychiatrist he believes in a you know
the brain disorder concept but then he
reviews that in his textbook essential
psychopharmacology there is no clear and
convincing evidence that mono amine
deficiency that search energy efficiency
accounts for depression that is there is
no real mono amine deficit who's Eric
nessler I'm just showing you he's
considered one of the leading scientists
in the world on neurotransmitter
activity in general and also how it
might relate to cognition and
psychiatric function and what does he
say in 2010 we have looked at this in
every way we can we've depleted
serotonin we've looked at genetic
associations we've looked at all this
there is little evidence to implicate
true deficits in any of these
neurotransmitters in the pathophysiology
of depression and then again he says
this is not a surprising finding because
there's no reason that the mechanism of
action of a treatment is the opposite of
disease pathophysiology
so you're seeing again here this
hypothesis sort of had a false beginning
a false rationale you know
philosophically again you can squish it
it comes down Jewish and also how do you
define depression what is depression we
all know depression is something in your
mind and in your head and loes no I'm
happy to talk about my own history of of
misery I'm gonna use word misery rather
than depression I've never been
diagnosed approach but I that incredibly
sad times my life but I know my misery
is in my attitude in my perception in my
thoughts in my feelings and doesn't
exist in things themselves neither
external nor internal
Melissa you were with me during the the
period of the death of my father no
someone else in some other situation
could and I was in China and I got the
news by email I think not even by
telephone I could completely understand
that someone else in that surgery
situation would go into a depression
it's totally understandable now there
are many reasons why that was not the
case for me right now
I mean conversely I would say the most
acute misery of my life which I think
could
have been diagnosed as depression was
when I was at the University of Toronto
and it was because of the quality of
education there you know what I wasn't a
rape victim or something it wasn't
something like that it was because the
incredibly low quality of education
there's is something stronger but of
course it's what I'm thinking and
feeling about it there were people
sitting next to me in the same classroom
with the same major who were completely
happy right with the same education this
isn't an objective reality in that sense
of course of course what argument
objective reality you know my father
really died the education was really of
low quality but you know there's
somebody sitting next to me who likes
drinking beer every night and playing
video games and who's just planning to
go to law school and become a lawyer it
doesn't doesn't really care about
politics and he's sitting in the same
the same classroom for those eyes and
he's and he's fine
so you know anyway there are a whole lot
of hurdles we leave over here in terms
of terms of medicating this but look
even if your background is only in
philosophy or only in Buddhist
philosophy to recognize the problem of
moving the goalposts
like okay so the original thesis was
that depression is caused by low
serotonin levels now there's another
parallel here so I've mentioned we've
mentioned diabetes you know blood sugar
levels we mentioned testosterone you
know another one for a very long time
researchers and psychologists presumed
or speculated that transgender sexual
dysphoria or they want to say
transgenderism would linked to irregular
hormone levels that men who wanted us as
women would have abnormal hormone levels
and enormous numbers of tests were done
on this and no the final conclusion is
that no the issue of being a transgender
person exists in your mind and
perceptions and thoughts and feelings
it's inside your brain it's not a
hormonal abnormality but that was a very
natural assumption people led to it may
be natural for people to also leap to
the assumption that what we call
depression is a hormonal condition or it
relates to the level of some serotonin
it's not hormone but a chemical in the
brain that it's a chemical imbalance in
the brain right and that was the
hypothesis that hypothesis was already
debunked in the 1980s not even the 1990s
but what did people do and now I'm
interesting people because it's not just
medical researchers there's a huge part
of the public involved and there were a
lot of just medical doctors who are not
specialists in the same way that your
local medical doctor or even your local
psychiatrist is not going to be an
expert in nutrition like you can have a
medical doctor telling you to eat more
eggs and bacon they don't really know
there are medical doctor but this is not
the rate of expertise in the same way
there were medical doctors who know a
little bit more than laypeople but
they're they're not doing this this kind
of research for the most part people
reacted to this being debunked by moving
the goal posts by trying to change the
definitions of what was supposed to be
proven anyway of what would be confited
considered efficacious of what really
matters here and they're trying to
preserve the narrative despite the fact
that the evidence base for it has been
debunked or removed so this is something
now again this is very much like the
religious mentality this is very much
like what I encountered in Buddhism when
I would debunk common misconceptions of
the religion so I've talked about one at
some length but yet people respond to
this they still want to believe in the
story they still wanted to believe in
the narrative oh but that's actually not
in the Bible that's not in the scripture
for some oh so that's just a modern idea
people meet up and attributed this oh
and the guy who made up the idea isn't a
Buddhist monk and isn't a respected
scholar it actually comes from this
crackpot source that's really not
credible oh well we can respond to that
by moving the goal posts and creating a
new mythology around it come with new
justification you can you can but that's
exactly the religious mentality not the
not a scientific modality not though not
the therapeutic mentality so there are a
lot of different Russians we can take
this in right now I mean you know you
know we could talk about our own
experience with misery depression
unhappiness with attempts to you know
cope with it medicate it you know what
have you I got I got all kinds of
feedback from the last video and again
let's not overstate
maybe 1500 people have watched the video
that's a video that made a big impact on
a lot of people and not everyone's
stupid again I don't even know if I
think less than 20 percent of the people
who watched it we're really stupid
enough to reject this what again when
I'm alluding to as a well proven
scientific fact because it is I'm not
gonna put myself in the position of
trying to prove things that have been so
extensively published and researched and
that are based on on self-evident
evidence you know but we also got people
writing in about the ways in which
antidepressant medication have destroyed
their lives so there's there's a real
price here that a price in blood so we
got a message okay so let's just pause
with one stat we're cribbing this from
the same source that we're using some
clips up in this video we can put in the
original source but you know one of the
other ironies here is many people said
to me in effect how dare you how dare I
criticize unnatural vegan on this when
unnatural vegans purpose originally was
to criticize another youtuber fully raw
Christina for fully raw Christina's very
vaguely stated case that diet and
exercise will improve your your
experience of depression well that may
sound like crazy pseudoscience whereas
the disease centered model of serotonin
reuptake inhibitor treatment may sound
like legitimate science prima facie on
the surface at first glance that may
sound like one is pseudoscience the
other is is legitimate science but in
this case the exact opposite is true for
one thing again the source we're linking
to here the video source will probably
link to a couple surgeons it goes to the
fact that if you if you leave depression
untreated no medication at all after one
year about eighty-five percent of people
will recover anyway this is about an 85
percent recovery rate then within one
year and this is very hard for drugs to
compete with for a drug to be
efficacious it then has to achieve more
than that after
you're an SSRI drugs do not they do
worse at the one-year mark which is
another reason why a lot of the studies
in favor of them or structure in such a
way to just look at the first six weeks
of treatment the initial period of
response or not won't turn treatment um
but we have a study we just we just saw
these stats on screens this is fresh
mind and it compared after one year
treatment with Zoloft
so zoloft is an SSRI drugs zoloft prozac
these are particular brand names for
particular drugs and spots
classification particular types of major
depression treatment after one year with
zoloft treatment after one year zoloft
plus exercise offend treatment after one
year exercise only only Desai's know its
presence and what will put up the stat
on screen its results are way better and
yet the results are way more positive
for recovering for depression just
through exercise
that may sound ridiculous I'm gonna get
and think about it for the Buddhist
perspective when I presented my findings
which are from my perspective it's easy
for me to prove this to you oh hey let's
actually read what the text says let's
actually look at this from a Buddhist
but it may sound like I'm the crackpot
when I said oh no this text you think is
about human psychology and maybe the
fabric of reality is somebody you think
it's this really vague cosmic
Stephenville philosophy it's actually a
description of how the the fetus forms
in the embryo it may sound like I'm the
one who's being some kind of pseudo
scientific Coleman looking for given
that those are your your assumptions but
I mean you know this is the thing about
what is wisdom a large part of wisdom is
detachment from your assumptions this is
the I mean I'm not such a fan of
Socrates Socrates doesn't solve all of
our problems but you know the
fundamental wisdom being I know my own
ignorance I know what I do not know I'm
willing to question these things or in
question others and so on how do we how
do we come these conclusions in the
first place yeah yeah ironically fully
Roth Kristina's advice won't harm you
right I know she wasn't specifically
telling people to get on antidepressants
but it's dangerous and harmful to get on
antidepressants
right well ok you know so you've
reminded me of something I haven't
talked about so one element is the harm
and we do have this idea of the
Hippocratic oath first do no harm it's a
real question how much harm are you
doing people by putting them on these
these drugs the second is though there's
also just this word effect what is the
effect of these drugs an effect is
different from effectiveness this is why
I'm emphasizing this it's slippery you
might not you might not catch this my
claim is not that SSRI drugs have no
effect have zero effect but I would
claim that they are ineffective so
several years ago when I was still in
Canada before I moved to Kunming
before I moved amongst you so it's now
maybe three years ago I made a video
talking about the enhanced placebo
effect so briefly here I'm in an earlier
video talk about it's a very important
concept in science actually none of our
No
lately to talk about this most people
understand the placebo effect so really
quickly placebo effect is I give you a
pill or a glass of water that does
nothing there's no medical effect and
then we measure how you recover from the
disease how you improve what the effects
are and what your perception of your on
earth is so it's well known if you just
give someone a fake medicine a medicine
that has zero effect many people will
perceive themselves anyway as having had
a medical effect okay but that's not the
enhanced placebo effect the enhanced
placebo effect is I give you a drug that
has real effects but they're irrelevant
to your disease that were relevant to
your condition right so let's say you
have that well actually guess this is a
real example let's say you have sinus
congestion and I give you a cream that
you rub onto your skin that causes
tingling so you have a cold you have a
flu or something and I give you a cream
some kind of minty green but with a real
medical element and it causes this
sensation in your skin so I've seen this
in many different cultures around the
world you know where the different kinds
of skin treatments for for cold and flu
this is the modern was in Cambodia they
have an equivalent where they actually
take a piece of metal and rub it into
your back a local I guess it is made out
of eucalyptus or some kind of tree oil
and it causes this kind of cold burning
sensation and people think it makes
their cold better or their flu but their
fever better feed fever or symptoms
right this has an effect it's not that
it's zero effect so what you're gonna
feel and perceive about your health is
an enhanced placebo effect right no okay
so I've already cited this again an
earlier video but we have similar
Juwanna Moncrief going through and
debunking and debunking is the word
debunking a scientific study a
meta-analysis that was picked up in
mainstream newspapers like The Guardian
newspaper it was picked up as proving at
long last that
SSRIs that antidepressants were
effective and actually if you know how
to drip with the data the exact same
data proves the opposite so again this
is a little bit like Buddhist philosophy
so I'm not gonna go to this I don't feel
I need to prove this stuff to you people
if you guys can do the reading yourself
but you know it showed a difference the
clinical effect was 10.8 points out of
50 this is a human created scale at a 50
on that scale
6 points would be that your sleep has
improved like you're going to talk to
your psychiatrist and say well I was
really unhappy before because my father
died but you know now in the last 2
weeks my sleeves improve the doctor
could then use this scale say ok improve
sleep 6 points ok
so 1 point 8 points is by the definition
of scale not clinically significant it's
a tiny one point 8 out of 50 on this
particular scale as its structured does
not indicate that the drug is working it
indicates the opposite that the drug is
not working
however basically what the newspapers
were doing whether cynically or just ed
up in confidence was getting excited
that there was this tiny difference
whether they say this one point ADA
rounded off to two points that there was
this tiny difference correspond to the
drug that really can be the enhanced
placebo effect that that's any
difference and then beyond that okay
when you start talking about side
effects so what what you so with three
categories here right and Hance will see
well effect is category two right then
the other effect we're talking about
there are very real changes in your
brain chemistry quite a bit with these
drugs and all kinds of physical and
physiological changes right because it's
not an even though we talked about the
placebo effect it's not a placebo this
brings about all kinds of changes in
your feeling perception thinking and
life and one of the most obvious is the
impact on your sex drive your experience
of human sexuality and sexual desire
which in terms the history of psychiatry
and psychoanalysis that used to be a big
deal needs to be a major marker of your
psychological health whether or not you
can engage in sex you know or whether
not you're you're neurotic or
what-have-you
so I just wanna say there's no claim
from my part that these things have zero
effect the claim is again this isn't my
opinion this just proved
in terms of where the goalposts
originally were the function SSRIs were
supposed to have and that unnatural
begins still to this say day is
unscientifically pseudo scientifically
claiming the original thesis was that
depression linked to low levels of
serotonin right and that therefore SSRI
drugs would augment Puddle increase
serotonin levels in the brain that has
been debunked that is pseudoscience and
she is seriously recommending that more
people do the irresponsible ignorant
self-indulgent thing that she's doing
and not read the kind of sources of so
do not rejoin a montcrief not read Peter
Breggin country experts in the field to
devoted their lives of this and publish
many books on it not read the
peer-reviewed or even again even if so
again this comes back to my thing about
Buddhism even if the one article I read
you guys at the start of my last video I
read that three minutes even if that was
the only source of its kind which it's
not if there was just one article that
invalidated the evidence base and the
methodology of the other 50 articles
then that one article is enough that
tells you what you need to know if you
are a skeptic let's all look in the
mirror and think about what what skeptic
means being a skeptic means you don't
dismiss that one article I read out the
abstract at about three minutes one
article that's telling you this is an
evidence myth based on misinterpreting
and and and very obviously
misinterpreting in misrepresenting
statistics that rests on laughably
absurd definitions of terms that there
are problems here and how the narrative
is put together in what the evidence is
how its misconstrued and misinterpreted
even on concepts like statistical
significance versus clinical
significance that there are
methodological errors here and then
there's what the evidence base actually
actually reflects I've put this up
before the star D study showing that
that something like only 3% of people in
that study
sorry surgeon
look again this isn't my field but when
you're doing long term like one-year
analysis not the first six weeks
shockingly shockingly low numbers of
people actually get to get paws result
in this and I've had this stat on screen
before and today we heard the same
statistic again being reported repeated
by another source now this study has
starred e-trial is the largest
antidepressant trial ever conducted it
was funded by the NIH 4041 patients it
was conducted in real-world patients and
I will tell you the results were so bad
they fabricated the results and there's
a whistleblower lawsuit it's one of the
things we write about in psychiatry
under the influence they announced just
so you know they announced that 67% of
patients there was no placebo in this
group the way the study was designed you
were put on a drug if you didn't get out
well with the first drug you could get a
second drug if you didn't get well on
the second drug you could try a third
and then a fourth you got four tries and
what they announced it was that 67% of
people eventually remitted it's just not
true she actually looked about remission
according to the protocol criteria only
38% ever remitted and we go through in
the book about all the machination of
how they violated the criteria to up
that announced rate but here's the key
on this this study if you go to the
protocol said this study will guide
clinical care in the United States
because this is in real world patients
it's not in what happens is in so many
of the FDA studies they only allow
certain types of patients in those
studies really don't tell us about
real-world patients this is going to do
it and they said we're gonna have two
parts of this study we're gonna show
that if you keep trying you can find a
drug that works and then people will
stay well the whole point is that this
will show that people will stay well
they paid people to stay in the trial
they could adjust the dosages it was
real-world care now if you go to the
study and they announced the one-year
results you almost you just can't make
sense of it okay you just can't you look
at it you know some data is presented
but you can't make sense of it you know
why you can't make sense of it
no because the study results were
horrific
out of 4041 patients who entered that
study and got four you know had this
best clinical care possible there were
only 108 who remitted means the
depression went away and stayed well and
in the trial to the end of one year and
by the way the next speaker Irving
Kirsch is one of the people who's done
some of the analysis of this data so the
real stay well rate was less than 3% and
people do lie about it peer review
doesn't mean that people are lying
Buddhists lie in peer-reviewed articles
about Buddhism Catholics lie in
peer-reviewed articles about about
Catholicism I deal with this before the
the meditation articles then get
published meditation drills yes people
lie in scientific journals sometimes
it's because they sincerely believe the
lie in the same way that a Buddhist you
know maybe we've yeah yeah to me it's
just ridiculous that people who are
vegan who are pardon me aware that there
have been so many studies published on
positive effects of meat and dairy and
they are able to think skeptically about
it and say that you shouldn't pay
attention to these or these you should
pay attention to these ones that
advocate for a plant-based diet or at
least provide evidence that a
plant-based diet is healthier than a
typical omnivorous diet so it's like why
if you don't trust your doctor when they
tell you that you shouldn't eat meat why
would you trust them when they tell you
that you should get on an antidepressant
or why would you trust just the general
opinion that from whatever your
experiences were like reading online or
talking to people people maybe your
family members who have antidepressants
like why would you take that at face
value when you know that you're that
same family member it's me
enjoying Starion you know seeing knowing
that like you live with these these own
yeah you live with scientifically
unpopular opinions and you can pour that
what your opinion is against what you
could call the consensus in science why
wouldn't you
well why don't you google it no it
didn't it didn't think I didn't look
guys I'm not a special I don't have a
stack of books on my shelf about this
when I responded to a natural vegans
video I googled to get that
peer-reviewed article it didn't take
long
sorry it's not asking that much it's
really not yeah I mean I can understand
the desire just the natural inclination
to accept what authority figures tell
you and you know if your doctor says
that this is safe for you like if you
know this will help you this will help
you feel better of course like you you
want to trust your doctor and you want
to trust Authority you know that people
actually have your best and your best
right right now like you were your
health you know and that's the doc you
know that's the hypocrite Hippocratic
oath yeah do no harm doctor isn't
supposed to hurt you so um you know I
can understand when people saw that
video
you know commenting like well this is
what psychiatrists are prescribing like
how can you say that this is wrong in
doctors tell you eat eggs and bacon yeah
there are nutritionists who tell you
fish the diabetic Association right and
this is this famous example now thanks
to that movie the American Dietetic
Association encourage you to dairy
products which especially for diabetes
has this special link it's all but it's
bad for you general okay well I mean I
saw another misconception saying look
peer review is not what you think it is
and for me what your comments make me
think of just now is that consensus is
not what you think it is okay now
suppose someone said to you there is a
consensus among scientists that eating
eggs is healthy okay well let's use a
more marginal that eating yogurt is
healthy
okay Cowell yogurt yeah okay but you can
you condemn it in a sense you can
demonstrate this consensus I think it's
real this is a real misunderstanding of
what the word consensus means no but I
can respond as false there is no
consensus that cholesterol is is healthy
there is no consensus
that having animal fat in your diet is
healthy right there's any way we can get
into more but what's wrong with dairy
products and affecting your blood sugar
who can make a whole list of things here
there's there's no consensus that the
levels of estrogen in cow milk cow
yogurt are healthy that's not a
consensus right so now I've pointed to
you facts if you're gonna say to me that
yogurt is healthy
are you actually claiming that
cholesterol is something No okay so what
does that consensus mean like why in
what sense can you don't you think so
what's the opposite of consensus it's
that something is contested
scientifically so actually actually it's
contestable and actively contested
whether or not people should eat yogurt
who thought people should eat should eat
eggs and there are medical doctors on
both sides we can find reputable medical
doctors you know the former head of the
American Heart Association so on who do
advocate for a vegan diet and again as
with Buddhist studies I was I'm a very
unusual scholar of Buddhism I'm the guy
who's willing to question Oh does this
text really mean what everyone's does
this philosophy really mean what
everyone says it means so I'm the guy
who makes that finding honestly it
didn't take a genius what it took was
detachment right what it took was a kind
of analytical distance from your topic
where you're not so wrapped up in it
that you're going to see what's there
and you know question how did we come to
this conclusion
and this assumption and so on right um
how could you possibly say to me that
there is a consensus that SSRI drugs are
effective when the actual effect has
been debunked ie the original thesis and
which is still in the name SSRI the
thesis was that depression is caused by
low serotonin levels and that it's cured
by raising your serotonin levels when
did you get your serotonin levels
checked they don't do that because it is
a proven scientific fact that depression
does not in any way correspond to at
certain levels and that these drugs
don't act on the brain in that way their
effect is not to raise your serotonin
levels and and thus your depression and
thus also again this is directly counter
not just the the substance of what
unnatural being said but also the
wording to the letter the substance and
the sentiment and the letter this
disease-centered
theory of depression the idea that you
have quote a chemical imbalance in your
brain and that that's what depression is
that's what a natural began said you
that has been debunked so for you to see
to me there is consensus above this no
there isn't
and again if the only peer-reviewed
article on the subject is the one I read
to you and the first even if that's the
only one that shows you that there isn't
consensus that there is a contest about
the actual evidence base and about the
methodology right if if the evidence is
wrong or the evidence shows the contrary
of the original thesis and the
methodology is wrong then that's a
problem that can vitiate that can
invalidate the findings in 50 articles
100 articles so on and so forth alright
so I think that's a wrap for this video
we do have other things we can talk
about but I think probably so that it
gets to that person I think I'm going to
talk about that in a separate video and
I can talk a little bit more about
personal you know stuff related to human
history and depression and so on okay
but I mean look say this really briefly
you know your life has changed
dramatically in the last year net -2 you
know mine has too I mean the sources of
misery in my life have changed you know
the struggles I have have changed now
it's also true that my attitude towards
them has changed and my outlook and my
objectives you know things have changed
but you know I had a period of about two
years where I couldn't see my daughter
right where I was cut off from seeing my
daughter of course I was incredibly
unhappy about this now I'm in a
situation where I get to regularly see
my daughter on a schedule appointed by a
court in France hey we're gonna see her
again in about a week now or something
you know my life changed I had a pureed
world was unemployed then I had a period
where I was a university instructor
teaching English you know
China now I have a period where I'm in
college learning how to bake bread these
are changes you know the reality of how
depressing my life is changes from
period of time to time it's also true
that my attitude changes and of course
it can be a little snide to say to
someone oh well you should just change
your attitude I think it can also be
challenging to say to someone well you
should change your actual circumstances
you know like if you're unhappy with
your marriage maybe you've got to get
divorced you know and look at my
ultimate that was my situation if you
guys don't know I dumped my ex-wife she
didn't dump me
she didn't you know leave me I made the
decision you know to end that
relationship these are you know hard
hard decisions that people have to make
in their lives and you know again it is
partly a scientific conclusion and it's
partly a philosophical conclusion that I
don't believe the use of these drugs
long term could possibly possibly help
you in making those decisions in making
those changes in either your real-world
circumstances or your philosophical
attitude motivations perspective on them
they'll just to come back to this issue
effectiveness versus effect in terms of
the strength of the effect one of the
most powerful drugs in the world to
shake you out of depression has got to
be cocaine there's no way a meal if
you're sad because somebody your family
died you're sad because you hate your
university you're sad because of your
marriage if you did a short course of
treatment in cocaine you would be
completely jolted out of that depression
you may also do brain damage to yourself
you may also become an addict
you'll definitely ruin your sleep cycle
you ruin your your cardiac health you
run that with your heart there are a lot
of disadvantages using a there are a lot
of negative side effects your sex life
may get better or it may get worse
cocaine also has a big effect on human
sexuality but how would we possibly
deceive ourselves into thinking even if
cocaine is effective short term control
Gina how could we deceive ourselves into
thinking the problem was that you had a
coke
efficiency the situation was that this
was in any way comparable to a diabetic
getting a blood test with their blood
sugar levels and needed to augment their
insulin to someone with low testosterone
get into an assessment level check this
is a self-serving myth of the crudest
kind for a culture of self medication a
culture of people have become accustomed
to regarding human unhappiness itself as
a disease and ironically the cure that
has become so popular for that disease
as a proven fact just doesn't work a
virus Yin